---
title: Project description
type: landing

sections:
  - block: markdown
    id: section-1
    content:
      text: The ever-increasing demand for food availability, in tandem with the increasing world population, deteriorating natural resources, and increased urbanization, emphasizes the importance of research that aims to improve plant health and food production and quality. To provide food sustainably, it is essential to increase food production while reducing negative environmental impacts such as soil, water and nutrient loss, greenhouse gas emissions and degradation of ecosystems. According to the UN Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO), 40-50% of root crops, fruits and vegetables produced globally are lost each year to pests and pathogens (FAOSTAT 2016).
---



Recent discoveries have shown that the microorganisms associated with plants, also known as the plant microbiome, have a great impact on plant health and productivity. Due to the direct and important role of these microorganisms they are also referred to as the plant second genome. These recent findings have opened new frontiers in plant science, representing a paradigm shift in how we tackle plant problems. However, despite the current evidence suggesting the key role of the plant microbiome, this field of research has lagged behind the pace of rapidly changing agricultural and environmental circumstances. In fact, information on the microbiome of important agricultural crops and the ways to exploit beneficial microorganisms to improve plants health is still lacking, and so far, there has not been rigorous research addressed to understand and benefit from this vastly unexplored field. Deciphering the role/function of the plant microbiome, is usually hindered by the complex interaction between a high number of microorganisms and the host as well as the difficulty to evaluate and monitor the impact of these microorganisms on the plant. Hence, the ability to work with plants devoid of microorganisms (i.e. gnotobiotic), may represent a key strategy to understand the role of the microbiome as whole or as individual microorganisms.
   
The present project aims at using gnotobiotic plants to select and evaluate Biome Agents (BAs), defined here as any microorganism or members of the plant’s microbiome that can be used to: i) improve/enhance plant tolerance to biotic and/or abiotic stresses, ii) enhance the host growth, iii) increase the plant productivity, and iv) improve/enhance the quality of the crop production.

The integration of partners within the framework of the project has been planned to ensure a synergic interaction to achieve the following objectives: i) Production and multiplication of gnotobiotic plants of grapevine and lettuce used as model plants; ii) Development and optimization of sensorized smart boxes to grow gnotobiotic plants; iii) Isolation, screening and characterization of BAs using a plant-mediated system; iv) Exploiting gnotobiotic plants to evaluate the role of selected beneficial microorganisms and create synthetic communities able to increase plant growth and stress tolerance; and v) Evaluate selected microorganisms under greenhouse conditions.

The outcomes of these objectives are expected to provide cutting-edge information and lay the ground for innovative future researches and practical applications based on the use of the microbiome in an innovative and sustainable manner. The development of gnotobiotic plants and ad-hoc smart boxes for their growth is expected to lead to a paradigm shift in plant-microbe interactions research. Such germ-free systems will represent a valuable tool for several important applications ranging from the discovery of new microbes with biotechnological potential to the study of the plant holobiont. In particular, the plant-mediated selection of microorganisms promises great improvement in the discovery of BAs for grapevine and lettuce as well as for other plant species facilitating the identification of useful host-specific microbial consortia. On the other hand, the real-time monitoring of plant grown in gnotobiotic conditions, represent a powerful tool to advance our knowledge on plant-microbe interactions and determine the role of specific microorganisms. A controlled system in which specific microorganisms can be introduced and monitored greatly facilitate the interpretation of results including those from advanced 'Omic' technologies such as metagenomics, metabolomics and transcriptomics. This system will enable advanced studies to determine timing and patterns of the plant microbial colonization and the effect of microorganisms on water stress tolerance, fungal pathogenesis and plant resistance and growth. Results of experiments with gnotobiotic plants will be also useful to identify microorganisms to be evaluated in greenhouse conditions. This final part of the project will enable an overall validation of the project activities and will produce a range of microbial consortia or BAs that can be of great interest for a number of different stakeholders.
